========================================================
 :mod:`boing.utils.querypath` --- A query path language
========================================================

.. module:: boing.utils.querypath
   :synopsis: A query path language

The module :mod:`boing.utils.querypath` provides *Querypath*, a query
language that can be used to handle hierarchical data structures, no
matter if they are composed of standard containers, e.g. :class:`list`
or :class:`dict`, or instances of standard or custom classes.

The proposed *querypath* language is a derivation of JSONPath_, which
was proposed by Stefan Goessner to handle JSON_ structures. Beyond
some minor changes, the |boing|'s query language exploits the fact
that the attributes of Python class instances are stored inside the
attribute ``__dict__``, by actually treating the instances of not
Container classes as they were dictionaries.

The root object is indexed using the character ``$``, but it can be
omitted.

*Querypath* expressions can use the dot–notation::

   contacts.0.x

or the bracket–notation::

   ['contacts'][0]['x']

or a mix of them::

   contacts[0][x]

*Querypath* allows the wildcard symbol ``*`` for member names and
array indices, the descendant operator ``..`` and the array slice
syntax ``[start:end:step]``.

Python expressions can be used as an alternative to explicit names or
indices using the syntax ``[(<expr>)]``, as for example::

   contacts[(@.__len__()-1)].x

using the symbol ``@`` for the current object. Also consider that
built-in functions and classes are not available. Filter expressions
are supported via the syntax ``[?(<boolean expr>)]`` as in::

   contacts.*[?(@.x<10)]

In order to access to multiple items that have the same parent, it is
possible to use the operator ``,``, as in::

   props.width,height

while for selecting multiple items that have different parents, it is
necessary to combine two *Querypaths* using the operator ``|``, as
in::

   props.*|contact..x

Note that the ``,`` structure is normally quicker than the ``|``
structure, since in the latter case the query always restarts from the
root object. Indexing all the values of the data model is possible
using the path ``..*``.

The module :mod:`boing.utils.querypath` provides a set of static
functions for executing *Querypath* expression on user data
structures. The query expression must be provided as a standard string.

.. function:: get(obj, path)

   Return an iterator over the *obj*'s attributes or items matched by
   *path*.

.. function:: set_(obj, path, value, tocopy=False)

   Set the value of *obj* indexed by *path* to *value*. Return *obj*
   if *tocopy* is ``False``, otherwise the copy of *obj* where the
   modification is applied.

   .. note::

      This function must be used carefully since it is supposed to set the
      requested property to all the matched objects of the structure even if
      they do not own such property. A common procedure is require to
      set a specific property only for the objects that already own
      such property. As an example::

	 >>> tuple(querypath.items(table, "..x"))
	 (('contacts.0.x', 100), ('contacts.1.x', 500))
         >>> querypath.set_(table, "..*[?(@.x)].x",10)
	 <test.Surface object at 0xa2732ac>
	 >>> tuple(querypath.items(table, "..x"))
	 (('contacts.0.x', 10), ('contacts.1.x', 10))

   .. note::

      The function :func:`set_` does not accepts the querypaths
      ``"$"`` and ``""``.

.. function:: paths(obj, path)

   Return an iterator over the paths that index the *obj*'s attributes
   or items matched by *path*.

.. function:: items(obj, path)

   Return an iterator over the pairs (path, value) of the *obj*'s
   items that are matched by *path*.

.. function:: test(obj, path, wildcard=NOWILDCARD)

   Return whether at least one *obj*'s attributes or items is matched
   by *path*. The object *wildcard* matches even if *path* does not
   completely match an item in obj.

.. attribute:: NOWILDCARD

   Option specifing that the method :func:`test` should not consider
   any wildcard.

Usage examples
==============

   >>>   class Contact:
   ...      def __init__(self, x, y):
   ...         self.x = x
   ...         self.y = y
   ...      def polar(self):
   ...         return math.sqrt(x*x, y*y), math.atan2(y,x)
   ...      def __repr__(self):
   ...         return "Contact(%s,%s)"%(self.x, self.y)
   ...
   >>>   class Surface:
   ...      def __init__(self):
   ...         self.contacts = []
   ...         self.props = {}
   ...
   >>> table = Surface()
   >>> table.props['width'] = 800
   >>> table.props['height'] = 600
   >>> table.props['id'] = "mytable"
   >>> table.contacts.append(Contact(100,200))
   >>> table.contacts.append(Contact(500,600))
   >>> tuple(querypath.get(table, "contacts.0.x"))
   (100,)
   >>> tuple(querypath.get(table, "contacts.*.x"))
   (100, 500)
   >>> tuple(querypath.get(table, "props.width,height"))
   (600, 800)
   >>> tuple(querypath.get(table, "..y"))
   (200, 600)
   >>> tuple(querypath.get(table, "contacts.*[?(@.x<=100)]"))
   (Contact(100,200),)
   >>> tuple(querypath.get(table, "contacts.*.x,y|props.*"))
   (600, 500, 800, 200, 100, 600, "mytable")
   >>> querypath.set_(table, "contacts.*.x", 10)
   <test.Surface object at 0x8b2606c>
   >>> tuple(querypath.get(table, "contacts.*.x"))
   (10, 10)
   >>> tuple(querypath.paths(table, "props.*"))
   ('props.height', 'props.width')
   >>> tuple(querypath.items(table, "contacts.*"))
   (('contacts.1', Contact(100,200)), ('contacts.2', Contact(500,600)))
   >>> querypath.test(table, "props.dpi")
   False
   >>> querypath.test(table, "contacts.*[?(@.x>100)]")
   True
   >>> querypath.test(table, "props.width.mm")
   False
   >>> querypath.test(table, "props.width.mm", wildcard=800)
   True

The :class:`QPath` class
========================

Since *Querypath* strings must be pre-processed in order to be
executed, supposing you are going to use the same query multiple
times, it may be better to create a :class:`QPath` instance, and then
use the member methods, instead of the :mod:`boing.utils.querypath`
static functions. The proposed functuality is equal, but the string
does not have to be pre-processed for all the executions.

.. class:: QPath(path)

   A compiled *Querypath* expression.

   .. method:: get(obj)

      Return an iterator over the *obj*'s attributes or items matched
      by this QPath.

   .. method:: set(obj, value, tocopy=False)

      Set the value of *obj* indexed by this QPath to *value*. Return
      *obj* if *tocopy* is ``False``, otherwise the copy of *obj*
      where the modification is applied.

   .. method:: paths(obj)

      Return an iterator over the paths that index the *obj*'s
      attributes or items matched by this QPath.

   .. method:: items(obj)

      Return an iterator over the pairs (path, value) of the *obj*'s
      items that are matched by this QPath.

   .. method:: test(obj, wildcard=NOWILDCARD)

      Return whether this QPath matches at least one *obj*'s
      attributes or items. The object *wildcard* matches even if
      *path* does not completely match an item in obj.

   *Usage example*::

      >>> query = querypath.QPath("contacts.*.x")
      >>> tuple(query.get(table))
      (100, 500)
      >>> query.set(table, 10)
      <test.Surface object at 0xa2732ac>
      >>> tuple(query.paths(table))
      ('contacts.0.x', 'contacts.1.x')
      >>> tuple(query.items(table))
      (('contacts.0.x', 10), ('contacts.1.x', 10))
      >>> query.test(table)
      True

   :class:`QPath` instances can be combined using the ``+``
   operator. This operation concatenates the operand strings using the
   ``|`` delimiter, but it also tries to optimize the result by
   avoiding expression duplicates, as in::

      >>> querypath.QPath("props")+querypath.QPath("contacts")
      QPath('contacts|props')
      >>> querypath.QPath("props")+querypath.QPath("props")
      QPath('props')

   Still it cannot optimize more complex overlaps::

      >>> querypath.QPath("contacts[0]")+querypath.QPath("contacts.*")
      QPath('contacts[0]|contacts.*')



.. _JSON: http://www.json.org
.. _JSONPath: http://goessner.net/articles/JsonPath/
